London is the capital city of England and the United Kingdom, the
largest metropolitan area in the United Kingdom, and the largest urban
zone in the European Union by most measures.[note 1] Located on the
River Thames, London has been a major settlement for two millennia,
its history going back to its founding by the Romans, who named it
Londinium.[3] London's ancient core, the City of London, largely
retains its square-mile mediaeval boundaries. Since at least the 19th
century, the name London has also referred to the metropolis developed
around this core.[4] The bulk of this conurbation forms the London
region[5] and the Greater London administrative area,[6][note 2]
governed by the elected Mayor of London and the London
Assembly.[7]London is a leading global city, with strengths in the
arts, commerce, education, entertainment, fashion, finance,
healthcare, media, professional services, research and development,
tourism and transport all contributing to its prominence.[8] It is the
world's leading financial centre alongside New York City[9][10][11]
and has the fifth-largest metropolitan area GDP in the world, and the
largest in Europe.[12] London has been described as a world cultural
capital.[13][14][15][16] It is the world's most-visited city[17] and
has the world's largest city airport system measured by passenger
traffic.[18] London's 43 universities form the largest concentration
of higher education in Europe.[19] In 2012 London became the first
city to host the modern Summer Olympic Games three times.[20]London
has a diverse range of peoples and cultures, and more than 300
languages are spoken within its boundaries.[21] In March 2011, London
had an official population of 8,174,100, making it the most populous
municipality in the European Union,[22][23] and accounting for 12.5%
of the UK population.[24] The Greater London Urban Area is the
second-largest in the EU with a population of 8,278,251,[25] while the
London metropolitan area is the largest in the EU with an estimated
total population of between 12 million[26] and 14 million.[27] London
had the largest population of any city in the world from around 1831
to 1925.[28]London contains four World Heritage Sites: the Tower of
London; Kew Gardens; the site comprising the Palace of Westminster,
Westminster Abbey, and St Margaret's Church; and the historic
settlement of Greenwich (in which the Royal Observatory marks the
Prime Meridian, 0° longitude, and GMT).[29] Other famous landmarks
include Buckingham Palace, the London Eye, Piccadilly Circus, St
Paul's Cathedral, Tower Bridge, Trafalgar Square and Wembley
Stadium. London is home to numerous museums, galleries, libraries,
sporting events and other cultural institutions, including the British
Museum, National Gallery, Tate Modern, British Library, Wimbledon, and
40 West End theatres.[30] The London Underground is the oldest
underground railway network in the worldToponymyMain article:
Etymology of LondonThe name London may derive from the River ThamesThe
etymology of London is uncertain.[35] It is an ancient name andcan be
found in sources from the 2nd century. It is recorded c. 121
asLondinium, which points to Romano-British origin.[35] The
earliestattempted explanation, now disregarded, is attributed to
Geoffrey ofMonmouth in Historia Regum Britanniae.[35] This had it that
the nameoriginated from a supposed King Lud, who had allegedly taken
over thecity and named it Kaerlud.[36]From 1898 it was commonly
accepted that the name was of Celtic originand meant place belonging
to a man called *Londinos; this explanationhas since been
rejected.[35] Richard Coates put forward an explanationin 1998 that it
is derived from the pre-Celtic Old European*(p)lowonida, meaning
'river too wide to ford', and suggested thatthis was a name given to
the part of the River Thames which flowsthrough London; from this, the
settlement gained the Celtic form ofits name, *Lowonidonjon;[37] this
requires quite a serious amendmenthowever. The ultimate difficulty
lies in reconciling the Latin formLondinium with the modern Welsh
Llundain, which should demand a form*(h)lōndinion (as opposed to
*londīnion), from earlier*loundiniom. The possibility cannot be ruled
out that the Welsh namewas borrowed back in from English at a later
date, and thus cannot beused as a basis from which to reconstruct the
original name.Until 1889 the name "London" officially only applied to
the City ofLondon but since then it has also referred to the County of
London andnow Greater London.[4]Prehistory and antiquityIn 1300 the
City was still confined within the Roman walls.Although there is
evidence of scattered Brythonic settlements in thearea, the first
major settlement was founded by the Romans in 43AD.[38] This lasted
for just seventeen years and around 61, the Icenitribe led by Queen
Boudica stormed it, burning it to the ground.[39]The next, heavily
planned, incarnation of the city prospered andsuperseded Colchester as
the capital of the Roman province ofBritannia in 100. At its height
during the 2nd century, Roman Londonhad a population of around
60,000. By the 7th century, theAnglo-Saxons had created a new
settlement called Lundenwic over a mile(2 km) upstream from the old
Roman city, around what is now CoventGarden.[40]It is likely that
there was a harbour at the mouth of the River Fleetfor fishing and
trading, and this trading grew, until the city wasovercome by the
Vikings and forced to move east, back to the locationof the Roman
Londinium, in order to use its walls for protection.[41]Viking attacks
continued to increase, until 886 when Alfred the Greatrecaptured
London and made peace with the Danish leader, Guthrum.[42]The original
Saxon city of Lundenwic became Ealdwic ("old city"), aname surviving
to the present day as Aldwych, which is in the modernCity of
Westminster.[43]Two recent discoveries indicate that London could be
much older thanpreviously thought. In 1999 the remains of a Bronze Age
bridge werefound on the foreshore north of Vauxhall Bridge.[44] This
bridgeeither crossed the Thames, or went to a (lost) island in
theriver. Dendrology dated the timbers to 1500BC.[44] In 2010
thefoundations of a large timber structure, dated to 4500BC, were
foundon the Thames foreshore, south of Vauxhall Bridge.[45] The
function ofthe mesolithic structure is not known. Both structures are
on SouthBank, at a natural crossing point where the River Effra flows
into theRiver Thames.[45]Middle AgesThe Lancastrian siege of London in
1471 is attacked by a Yorkistsally.With the collapse of Roman rule in
the early 5th century, Londonceased to be a capital and was
effectively abandoned. However, fromthe 6th century, an Anglo-Saxon
settlement known as Lundenwicdeveloped slightly to the west of the old
Roman city, around what isnow Covent Garden and the Strand, likely
rising to a population of10–12,000.[40] In the 9th century, London was
repeatedly attacked byVikings, leading to a return to the location of
Roman Londinium, inorder to use its walls for protection.[41]
Following the unificationof England in the 10th century, London,
already the country's largestcity and most important trading centre,
became increasingly importantas a political centre, although it still
faced competition fromWinchester, the Anglo-Saxon capital of England
and traditional centreof the kingdom of Wessex.In the 11th century,
King Edward the Confessor refounded and rebuiltWestminster Abbey, and
Westminster, a short distance upstream fromLondon, became a favoured
royal residence. From this point onward,Westminster steadily
supplanted the City of London itself as a venuefor the business of
national government.[46]Westminster Abbey is a World Heritage Site and
one of London's oldestand most important buildings as seen in this
painting (Canaletto,1749)Following his victory in the Battle of
Hastings, William, Duke ofNormandy, was crowned King of England in the
newly finishedWestminster Abbey on Christmas Day 1066.[47] William
constructed theTower of London, the first of the many Norman castles
in England to berebuilt in stone, in the southeastern corner of the
city, tointimidate the native inhabitants.[48] In 1097, William II
began thebuilding of Westminster Hall, close by the abbey of the same
name. Thehall became the basis of a new Palace of
Westminster.[49][50]During the 12th century, the institutions of
central government, whichhad hitherto accompanied the royal English
court as it moved aroundthe country, grew in size and sophistication
and became increasinglyfixed in one place. In most cases this was
Westminster, although theroyal treasury, having been moved from
Winchester, came to rest in theTower. While the City of Westminster
developed into a true capital ingovernmental terms, its distinct
neighbour, the City of London,remained England's largest city and
principal commercial centre, andit flourished under its own unique
administration, the Corporation ofLondon. In 1100, its population was
around 18,000; by 1300 it hadgrown to nearly 100,000.[51]Disaster
struck during the Black Death in the mid-14th century, whenLondon lost
nearly a third of its population.[52] London was the focusof the
Peasants' Revolt in 1381.[53]Early modernThe Great Fire of London
destroyed many parts of the city in 1666.London in 1806During the
Tudor period the Reformation produced a gradual shift toProtestantism,
with much of London passing from church to privateownership.[54] The
traffic in woollen cloths shipped undyed andundressed from London to
the nearby shores of the Low Countries, foruse by well-to-do wearers
chiefly in the interior of thecontinent.[clarification needed] But the
tentacles of English maritimeenterprise hardly extended beyond the
seas of north-west Europe. Thecommercial route to Italy and the
Mediterranean Sea normally laythrough Antwerp and over the Alps; any
ships passing through theStrait of Gibraltar to or from England were
likely to be Italian orRagusan. Upon the re-opening of the Netherlands
to English shipping inJanuary 1565 there at once ensued a strong
outburst of commercialactivity.[55] The Royal Exchange was
founded.[56] Mercantilism grewand monopoly trading companies such as
the East India Company wereestablished, with trade expanding to the
New World. London became theprincipal North Sea port, with migrants
arriving from England andabroad. The population rose from an estimated
50,000 in 1530 to about225,000 in 1605.[54]In the 16th century William
Shakespeare and his contemporaries livedin London at a time of
hostility to the development of the theatre. Bythe end of the Tudor
period in 1603, London was still verycompact. There was an
assassination attempt on James I in Westminster,through the Gunpowder
Plot on 5 November 1605.[57] London was plaguedby disease in the early
17th century,[58] culminating in the GreatPlague of 1665–1666, which
killed up to 100,000 people, or a fifth ofthe population.[59]The Great
Fire of London broke out in 1666 in Pudding Lane in the cityand
quickly swept through the wooden buildings.[60] Rebuilding tookover
ten years and was supervised by Robert Hooke[61][62][63] asSurveyor of
London.[64] In 1708 Christopher Wren's masterpiece, StPaul's Cathedral
was completed. During the Georgian era new districtssuch as Mayfair
were formed in the west; and new bridges over theThames encouraged
development in South London. In the east, the Portof London expanded
downstream.In 1762 George III acquired Buckingham House and it was
enlarged overthe next 75 years. During the 18th century, London was
dogged by crimeand the Bow Street Runners were established in 1750 as
a professionalpolice force.[65] In total, more than 200 offences were
punishable bydeath,[66] and women and children were hanged for petty
theft.[67]Over 74 per cent of children born in London died before they
werefive.[68] The coffeehouse became a popular place to debate ideas,
withgrowing literacy and the development of the printing press making
newswidely available; and Fleet Street became the centre of the
Britishpress.According to Samuel Johnson:You find no man, at all
intellectual, who is willing to leaveLondon. No, Sir, when a man is
tired of London, he is tired of life;for there is in London all that
life can afford.—Samuel Johnson, 1777[69]Late modern and
contemporaryBritish volunteer recruits in London, August 1914A bombed
out London street during the Blitz of World War IILondon was the
world's largest city from about 1831 to 1925.[70]London's overcrowded
conditions led to cholera epidemics,[71] claiming14,000 lives in 1848,
and 6,000 in 1866.[72] Rising traffic congestionled to the creation of
the world's first local urban rail network. TheMetropolitan Board of
Works oversaw infrastructure expansion in thecapital and some of the
surrounding counties; it was abolished in 1889when the London County
Council was created out of those areas of thecounties surrounding the
capital . The Blitz and other bombing by theGerman Luftwaffe during
World War II killed over 30,000 Londoners anddestroyed large tracts of
housing and other buildings acrossLondon. Immediately after the war,
the 1948 Summer Olympics were heldat the original Wembley Stadium, at
a time when the city had barelyrecovered from the war.In 1951 the
Festival of Britain was held on the South Bank. The GreatSmog of 1952
led to the Clean Air Act 1956, which ended the "pea soupfogs" for
which London had been notorious. From the 1940s onwards,London became
home to a large number of immigrants, largely fromCommonwealth
countries such as Jamaica, India, Bangladesh andPakistan, making
London one of the most diverse cities in Europe.Primarily starting in
the mid-1960s, London became a centre for theworldwide youth culture,
exemplified by the Swinging London subcultureassociated with the
King's Road, Chelsea and Carnaby Street. The roleof trendsetter was
revived during the punk era. In 1965 London'spolitical boundaries were
expanded to take into account the growth ofthe urban area and a new
Greater London Council was created. DuringThe Troubles in Northern
Ireland, London was subjected to bombingattacks by the Provisional
IRA. Racial inequality was highlighted bythe 1981 Brixton
riot. Greater London's population declined steadilyin the decades
after World War II, from an estimated peak of 8.6million in 1939 to
around 6.8 million in the 1980s. The principalports for London moved
downstream to Felixstowe and Tilbury, with theLondon Docklands area
becoming a focus for regeneration as the CanaryWharf development. This
was borne out of London's ever-increasing roleas a major international
financial centre during the 1980s.The Thames Barrier was completed in
the 1980s to protect Londonagainst tidal surges from the North
Sea. The Greater London Councilwas abolished in 1986, which left
London as the only large metropolisin the world without a central
administration. In 2000, London-widegovernment was restored, with the
creation of the Greater LondonAuthority. To celebrate the start of the
21st century, the MillenniumDome, London Eye and Millennium Bridge
were constructed. On 6 July2005 London was awarded the 2012 Summer
Olympics, making London thefirst city to stage the Olympic Games three
times.[73]GovernmentLondonThis article is part of the series:Politics
and government ofLondonSovereignElizabeth IIGreater London
AuthorityMayorBoris JohnsonDeputyVictoria BorwickLondon
AssemblyMayoral electionsConstituenciesCity of London CorporationLord
MayorSheriffWardsCourt of AldermenParliament of the United Kingdom1998
referendumGLA Act 1999GLA Act 2007ElectionsConstituenciesEuropean
ParliamentElectionsEuropean Parliament constituencyCommittee of the
RegionsSubsidiarityBoroughsMiddle TempleInner Temple British politics
portalv t eLocal governmentMain articles: Local government in London,
History of local governmentin London, and List of heads of London
governmentThe administration of London is formed of two tiers—a
city-wide,strategic tier and a local tier. City-wide administration
iscoordinated by the Greater London Authority (GLA), while
localadministration is carried out by 33 smaller authorities.[74] The
GLAconsists of two elected components; the Mayor of London, who
hasexecutive powers, and the London Assembly, who scrutinise the
mayor'sdecisions and can accept or reject his budget proposals each
year. Theheadquarters of the GLA is City Hall, Southwark; the mayor is
BorisJohnson. The mayor's statutory planning strategy is published as
theLondon Plan, which was most recently revised in 2011.[75] The
localauthorities are the councils of the 32 London boroughs and the
City ofLondon Corporation.[76] They are responsible for most local
services,such as local planning, schools, social services, local roads
andrefuse collection. Certain functions, such as waste management,
areprovided through joint arrangements. In 2009–2010 the combined
revenueexpenditure by London councils and the GLA amounted to just
over £22billion (£14.7 billion for the boroughs and £7.4 billion for
theGLA)[77]Policing in Greater London, with the exception of the City
of London,is provided by the Metropolitan Police Force, overseen by
theMetropolitan Police Authority. The City of London has its own
policeforce – the City of London Police.[78] The British Transport
Policeare responsible for police services on National Rail and
LondonUnderground services.[79]The London Fire Brigade is the
statutory fire and rescue service forGreater London. It is run by the
London Fire and Emergency PlanningAuthority and is the third-largest
fire service in the world.[80]National Health Service ambulance
services are provided by the LondonAmbulance Service (LAS) NHS Trust,
the largest free at the point ofuse emergency ambulance service in the
world.[81] The London AirAmbulance charity operates in conjunction
with the LAS whererequired. Her Majesty's Coastguard and the Royal
National LifeboatInstitution operate on the River
Thames.[82][83]National governmentLondon is the seat of the Government
of the United Kingdom, which islocated around the Palace of
Westminster. Many government departmentsare located close to
Parliament, particularly along Whitehall,including the Prime
Minister's residence at 10 Downing Street.[84] TheBritish Parliament
is often referred to as the "Mother of Parliaments"(although this
sobriquet was first applied to England itself by JohnBright)[85]
because it has been the model for most other parliamentarysystems, and
its Acts have created many other parliaments.GeographyMain article:
Geography of LondonScopeGreater London is the top-level administrative
subdivision coveringLondon. The small, ancient City of London at its
core once containedthe whole settlement, but as the urban area grew
the City Corporationresisted attempts to amalgamate it with its
suburbs, causing "London"to be defined in a number ways for different
purposes; and thesituation was once open to legal debate.[86] Forty
per cent of GreaterLondon is covered by the London post town, within
which 'LONDON' formspart of postal addresses.[87][88]Satellite view of
LondonMap of central LondonThe London telephone area code (020) covers
a larger area, similar insize to Greater London, although some outer
districts are omitted andsome places just outside are included. The
area within the orbital M25motorway is normally what is referred to as
'London'.[89] and theGreater London boundary has been aligned to it in
places.[90]Outward urban expansion is now prevented by the
Metropolitan GreenBelt,[91] although the built-up area extends beyond
the boundary inplaces, resulting in a separately defined Greater
London UrbanArea. Beyond this is the vast London commuter belt.[92]
Greater Londonis split for some purposes into Inner London and Outer
London.[93] Thecity is split by the River Thames into North and South,
with aninformal central London area in its interior. The coordinates
of thenominal centre of London, traditionally considered to be the
originalEleanor Cross at Charing Cross near the junction of Trafalgar
Squareand Whitehall, are approximately 51°30′26″N
00°07′39″W.[94]StatusWithin London, both the City of London and the
City of Westminsterhave city status and both the City of London and
the remainder ofGreater London are the ceremonial counties.[95] The
area of GreaterLondon has incorporated areas that were once part of
the historiccounties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, Essex and
Hertfordshire.[96]London's status as the capital of England, and later
the UnitedKingdom, has never been granted or confirmed officially—by
statute orin written form.[note 4]Its position was formed through
constitutional convention, making itsstatus as de facto capital a part
of the UK's unwrittenconstitution. The capital of England was moved to
London fromWinchester as the Palace of Westminster developed in the
12th and 13thcenturies to become the permanent location of the royal
court, andthus the political capital of the nation.[100] More
recently, GreaterLondon has been defined as a region of England and in
this contextknown as London.[5]TopographyPrimrose Hill.Greater London
covers an area of 1,583 square kilometres (611 sq mi),an area which
had a population of 7,172,036 in 2001 and a populationdensity of 4,542
inhabitants per square kilometre (11,760 /sq mi). Alarger area,
referred to as the London Metropolitan Region or theLondon
Metropolitan Agglomeration covers an area of 8,382 squarekilometres
(3,236 sq mi) has a population of 12,653,500 and apopulation density
of 1,510 inhabitants per square kilometre (3,900/sq mi).[101] Modern
London stands on the Thames, its primarygeographical feature, a
navigable river which crosses the city fromthe south-west to the
east. The Thames Valley is a floodplainsurrounded by gently rolling
hills including Parliament Hill,Addington Hills, and Primrose
Hill. The Thames was once a muchbroader, shallower river with
extensive marshlands; at high tide, itsshores reached five times their
present width.[102]Since the Victorian era the Thames has been
extensively embanked, andmany of its London tributaries now flow
underground. The Thames is atidal river, and London is vulnerable to
flooding.[103] The threat hasincreased over time due to a slow but
continuous rise in high waterlevel by the slow 'tilting' of Britain
(up in the north and down inthe south) caused by post-glacial
rebound.[104]In 1974, a decade of work began on the construction of
the ThamesBarrier across the Thames at Woolwich to deal with this
threat. Whilethe barrier is expected to function as designed until
roughly 2070,concepts for its future enlargement or redesign are
already beingdiscussed.[105]Climate"The weather in London" redirects
here. On Wikipedia, it once was longused as a deliberate example of a
non-existent page in Wikipediadocumentation, see Talk:The weather in
London for more details.London has a temperate oceanic climate,
similar to much of southernBritain. Despite its reputation as being a
rainy city, London receivesless precipitation in a year than Rome at
834 mm (32.8 in), orBordeaux at 923 mm (36.3 in).[106] Winters are
generally chilly tocold with frost usually occurring in the suburbs on
average twice aweek from November to March. Snow usually occurs about
four or fivetimes a year mostly from December to February. Snowfall
during Marchand April is rare but does occur every two or three
years. Wintertemperatures seldom fall below −4 °C (24.8 °F) or rise
above 14 °C(57.2 °F). During the winter of 2010, London experienced
its lowesttemperature on record (−14 °C (6.8 °F)) in Northolt and the
heaviestsnow seen for almost two decades, a huge strain on the
city'stransport infrastructure. Temperature extremes for all sites in
theLondon area range from 38.1 °C (100.6 °F) at Kew during August
2003,(which has been proposed to be the UK's highest
'accurate'temperature)[107] down to −16.1 °C (3.0 °F) at Northolt
during January1962.[108] Temperatures of below −20 °C (−4.0 °F) have
been notedprior to the 20th century, but the accuracy cannot be
validated.Summers are generally warm and sometimes hot, the heat being
boostedby the urban heat island effect making the centre of London at
times 5°C (9 °F) warmer than the suburbs and outskirts. London's
summeraverage is 24 °C (75.2 °F). On average there are 7 days a year
above30 °C (86.0 °F) and 2 days a year above 32 °C (89.6
°F). Temperaturesof 26 °C (80 °F) usually occur on a weekly basis from
mid- June tolate August.During the 2003 European heat wave there were
14 consecutive daysabove 30 °C (86.0 °F) and 2 consecutive days where
temperatures soaredup to 38 °C (100.4 °F), leading to hundreds of heat
relateddeaths. Rain generally occurs on around 2 out of 10
summerdays. Spring and Autumn are mixed seasons and can be
pleasant. On 1October 2011, the air temperature attained 30 °C (86.0
°F) and inApril 2011 it reached 28 °C (82.4 °F). However in recent
years both ofthese months have also had snowfall. Temperature extremes
range from−10 °C (14.0 °F) to 37.9 °C (100.2 °F).
